malloc(3)                Library Functions Manual               malloc(3)
NAME         top
       malloc, free, calloc, realloc, reallocarray - allocate and free
       dynamic memory
LIBRARY         top
       Standard C library (libc, -lc)
SYNOPSIS         top
       #include <stdlib.h>

       void *malloc(size_t size);
       void free(void *_Nullable p);
       void *calloc(size_t n, size_t size);
       void *realloc(void *_Nullable p, size_t size);
       void *reallocarray(void *_Nullable p, size_t n, size_t size);

   Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
   feature_test_macros(7)):

       reallocarray():
           Since glibc 2.29:
               _DEFAULT_SOURCE
           glibc 2.28 and earlier:
               _GNU_SOURCE
DESCRIPTION         top
   malloc()
       The malloc() function allocates size bytes and returns a pointer
       to the allocated memory.  The memory is not initialized.  If size
       is 0, then malloc() returns a unique pointer value that can later
       be successfully passed to free().  (See "Nonportable behavior" for
       portability issues.)

   free()
       The free() function frees the memory space pointed to by p, which
       must have been returned by a previous call to malloc() or related
       functions.  Otherwise, or if p has already been freed, undefined
       behavior occurs.  If p is NULL, no operation is performed.

   calloc()
       The calloc() function allocates memory for an array of n elements
       of size bytes each and returns a pointer to the allocated memory.
       The memory is set to zero.  If n or size is 0, then calloc()
       returns a unique pointer value that can later be successfully
       passed to free().

       If the multiplication of n and size would result in integer
       overflow, then calloc() returns an error.  By contrast, an integer
       overflow would not be detected in the following call to malloc(),
       with the result that an incorrectly sized block of memory would be
       allocated:

           malloc(n * size);

   realloc()
       The realloc() function changes the size of the memory block
       pointed to by p to size bytes.  The contents of the memory will be
       unchanged in the range from the start of the region up to the
       minimum of the old and new sizes.  If the new size is larger than
       the old size, the added memory will not be initialized.

       If p is NULL, then the call is equivalent to malloc(size), for all
       values of size.

       If size is equal to zero, and p is not NULL, then the call is
       equivalent to free(p) (but see "Nonportable behavior" for
       portability issues).

       Unless p is NULL, it must have been returned by an earlier call to
       malloc or related functions.  If the area pointed to was moved, a
       free(p) is done.

   reallocarray()
       The reallocarray() function changes the size of (and possibly
       moves) the memory block pointed to by p to be large enough for an
       array of n elements, each of which is size bytes.  It is
       equivalent to the call

           realloc(p, n * size);

       However, unlike that realloc() call, reallocarray() fails safely
       in the case where the multiplication would overflow.  If such an
       overflow occurs, reallocarray() returns an error.
RETURN VALUE         top
       The malloc(), calloc(), realloc(), and reallocarray() functions
       return a pointer to the allocated memory, which is suitably
       aligned for any type that fits into the requested size or less.
       On error, these functions return NULL and set errno.  Attempting
       to allocate more than PTRDIFF_MAX bytes is considered an error, as
       an object that large could cause later pointer subtraction to
       overflow.

       The free() function returns no value, and preserves errno.

       The realloc() and reallocarray() functions return NULL if p is not
       NULL and the requested size is zero; this is not considered an
       error.  (See "Nonportable behavior" for portability issues.)
       Otherwise, the returned pointer may be the same as p if the
       allocation was not moved (e.g., there was room to expand the
       allocation in-place), or different from p if the allocation was
       moved to a new address.  If these functions fail, the original
       block is left untouched; it is not freed or moved.
ERRORS         top
       calloc(), malloc(), realloc(), and reallocarray() can fail with
       the following error:

       ENOMEM Out of memory.  Possibly, the application hit the RLIMIT_AS
              or RLIMIT_DATA limit described in getrlimit(2).  Another
              reason could be that the number of mappings created by the
              caller process exceeded the limit specified by
              /proc/sys/vm/max_map_count.
ATTRIBUTES         top
       For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
       attributes(7).
       ┌──────────────────────────────────────┬───────────────┬─────────┐
       │ Interface                            │ Attribute     │ Value   │
       ├──────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────┼─────────┤
       │ malloc(), free(), calloc(),          │ Thread safety │ MT-Safe │
       │ realloc()                            │               │         │
       └──────────────────────────────────────┴───────────────┴─────────┘
STANDARDS         top
       malloc()
       free()
       calloc()
       realloc()
              C23, POSIX.1-2024.

       reallocarray()
              POSIX.1-2024.

   realloc(p, 0)
       The behavior of realloc(p, 0) in glibc doesn't conform to any of
       C99, C11, POSIX.1-2001, POSIX.1-2004, POSIX.1-2008, POSIX.1-2013,
       POSIX.1-2017, or POSIX.1-2024.  The C17 specification was changed
       to make it conforming, but that specification made it impossible
       to write code that reliably determines if the input pointer is
       freed after realloc(p, 0), and C23 changed it again to make this
       undefined behavior, acknowledging that the C17 specification was
       broad enough that undefined behavior wasn't worse than that.

       reallocarray() suffers the same issues in glibc.

       musl libc and the BSDs conform to all versions of ISO C and
       POSIX.1.

       gnulib provides the realloc-posix module, which provides wrappers
       realloc() and reallocarray() that conform to all versions of ISO C
       and POSIX.1.

       There's a proposal to standardize the BSD behavior: 
       ⟨https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n3621.txt⟩.
HISTORY         top
       malloc()
       free()
       calloc()
       realloc()
              POSIX.1-2001, C89.

       reallocarray()
              glibc 2.26.  OpenBSD 5.6, FreeBSD 11.0.

       malloc() and related functions rejected sizes greater than
       PTRDIFF_MAX starting in glibc 2.30.

       free() preserved errno starting in glibc 2.33.

   realloc(p, 0)
       C89 was ambiguous in its specification of realloc(p, 0).  C99
       partially fixed this.

       The original implementation in glibc would have been conforming to
       C99.  However, and ironically, trying to comply with C99 before
       the standard was released, glibc changed its behavior in glibc
       2.1.1 into something that ended up not conforming to the final C99
       specification (but this is debated, as the wording of the standard
       seems self-contradicting).
NOTES         top
       By default, Linux follows an optimistic memory allocation
       strategy.  This means that when malloc() returns non-NULL there is
       no guarantee that the memory really is available.  In case it
       turns out that the system is out of memory, one or more processes
       will be killed by the OOM killer.  For more information, see the
       description of /proc/sys/vm/overcommit_memory and
       /proc/sys/vm/oom_adj in proc(5), and the Linux kernel source file
       Documentation/vm/overcommit-accounting.rst.

       Normally, malloc() allocates memory from the heap, and adjusts the
       size of the heap as required, using sbrk(2).  When allocating
       blocks of memory larger than MMAP_THRESHOLD bytes, the glibc
       malloc() implementation allocates the memory as a private
       anonymous mapping using mmap(2).  MMAP_THRESHOLD is 128 kB by
       default, but is adjustable using mallopt(3).  Prior to Linux 4.7
       allocations performed using mmap(2) were unaffected by the
       RLIMIT_DATA resource limit; since Linux 4.7, this limit is also
       enforced for allocations performed using mmap(2).

       To avoid corruption in multithreaded applications, mutexes are
       used internally to protect the memory-management data structures
       employed by these functions.  In a multithreaded application in
       which threads simultaneously allocate and free memory, there could
       be contention for these mutexes.  To scalably handle memory
       allocation in multithreaded applications, glibc creates additional
       memory allocation arenas if mutex contention is detected.  Each
       arena is a large region of memory that is internally allocated by
       the system (using brk(2) or mmap(2)), and managed with its own
       mutexes.

       If your program uses a private memory allocator, it should do so
       by replacing malloc(), free(), calloc(), and realloc().  The
       replacement functions must implement the documented glibc
       behaviors, including errno handling, size-zero allocations, and
       overflow checking; otherwise, other library routines may crash or
       operate incorrectly.  For example, if the replacement free() does
       not preserve errno, then seemingly unrelated library routines may
       fail without having a valid reason in errno.  Private memory
       allocators may also need to replace other glibc functions; see
       "Replacing malloc" in the glibc manual for details.

       Crashes in memory allocators are almost always related to heap
       corruption, such as overflowing an allocated chunk or freeing the
       same pointer twice.

       The malloc() implementation is tunable via environment variables;
       see mallopt(3) for details.

   Nonportable behavior
       The behavior of these functions when the requested size is zero is
       glibc specific; other implementations may return NULL without
       setting errno, and portable POSIX programs should tolerate such
       behavior.  See realloc(3p).

       POSIX requires memory allocators to set errno upon failure.
       However, the C standard does not require this, and applications
       portable to non-POSIX platforms should not assume this.

       Portable programs should not use private memory allocators, as
       POSIX and the C standard do not allow replacement of malloc(),
       free(), calloc(), and realloc().
BUGS         top
       Programmers would naturally expect by induction that
       realloc(p, size) is consistent with free(p) and malloc(size), as
       that is the behavior in the general case.  This is not explicitly
       required by POSIX.1-2024 or C11, but all conforming
       implementations are consistent with that.

       The glibc implementation of realloc() is not consistent with that,
       and as a consequence, it is dangerous to call realloc(p, 0) in
       glibc.

       A trivial workaround for glibc is calling it as
       realloc(p, size?size:1).

       The workaround for reallocarray() in glibc —which shares the same
       bug— would be reallocarray(p, n?n:1, size?size:1).
EXAMPLES         top
       #include <err.h>
       #include <stddef.h>
       #include <stdio.h>
       #include <stdlib.h>
       #include <string.h>

       #define MALLOCARRAY(n, type)  ((type *) my_mallocarray(n, sizeof(type)))
       #define MALLOC(type)          MALLOCARRAY(1, type)

       static inline void *my_mallocarray(size_t n, size_t size);

       int
       main(void)
       {
           char  *p;

           p = MALLOCARRAY(32, char);
           if (p == NULL)
               err(EXIT_FAILURE, "malloc");

           strlcpy(p, "foo", 32);
           puts(p);
       }

       static inline void *
       my_mallocarray(size_t n, size_t size)
       {
           return reallocarray(NULL, n, size);
       }
SEE ALSO         top
       valgrind(1), brk(2), mmap(2), alloca(3), malloc_get_state(3),
       malloc_info(3), malloc_trim(3), malloc_usable_size(3), mallopt(3),
       mcheck(3), mtrace(3), posix_memalign(3)

       For details of the GNU C library implementation, see 
       ⟨https://sourceware.org/glibc/wiki/MallocInternals⟩
